
Chicago Workshop



# Organizing the reversible chain of transformations : from trade statistics records to datascapes

Paul Girard and Guillaume Plique 


Le but du papier : mettre en avant le médialab, prq c’est original. 
Avant : description technique de ce qu’on a fait. 
Passer du temps sur les enjeux méthodologiques pour l’exploitation
1. Comment faire en sorte que le truc soit utilisable par plusieurs chercheurs 
2. Versioning
3. Exploration visuelle pour chopper des erreurs dans les données
4. Analyse exploratoire classique



Our talk proposes to present how our research group design and develop new research softwares for the Social Sciences and Humanities.
Our proposition theoritically described in (Latour and al. 2012), is to design exploratory data analysis (Tukey 1977) tools (what we call datascapes) to let scholars circulates allong "the reversible chain of transformation" (Latour 1993) they need to build to support their research.
We will illustrate how we implement those methodological concepts into concrete web applications used as research tools in two economy history research projects: TOFLIT18 and RICARDO (Girard and al. 2016, Dedinger and Girard 2017).
We will present the technological and design choices we've made (a graph database, interactive data visualisations for analysis and for documentation, data version control and continuous integration...) to answer the methodological issues brought by the quali-quantitative analysis of historical trade statistics.



Dedinger, Béatrice, and Paul Girard. 2016. ‘Exploring Trade Globalization in the Long Run : The RICardo Project’. Historical Methods. http://ricardo.medialab.Sciences-po.fr/Dedinger_Girard_RICardo_HistoricalMethods.pdf.

Girard, Paul, Béatrice Dedinger, Donato Ricci, Benjamin Ooghe-Tabanou, Mathieu Jacomy, Guillaume Plique, and Grégory Tible. 2016. ‘RICardo Project : Exploring XIX Century International Trade’. In . Kraków, Poland. http://ricardo.medialab.sciences-po.fr/Girardetal_RICardo_dh2016_en.pdf.

Latour, Bruno. 1993. ‘Le Topofil de Boa-Vista. La Référence Scientifique: Montage Photophilosophique’. Raisons Pratiques 4: 187–216.
      
Latour, Bruno, Pablo Jensen, Tommaso Venturini, Sébastian Grauwin, and Dominique Boullier. 2012. ‘“The Whole Is Always Smaller than Its Parts” - a Digital Test of Gabriel Tardes’ Monads’. The British Journal of Sociology 63 (4): 590–615. doi:10.1111/j.1468-4446.2012.01428.x.
    
Tukey, John Wilder. 1977. Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
  
    
  
CUT:
    

We propose to present the Sciences Po médialab research group by exposing how the Science and Technologies Studies (STS) and more particularly the work of our scientific director Bruno Latour helps a team of research engineers and designers to invent new research tools for the Social sciences and humanities.
In (Latour 1993), Bruno Latour proposes a anthropological view on the scientific reference system. Latour describes this system as a reversible chain of transformation "between things and forms of the human mind". 
The phenomena doesn't happen in the middle point between matters and forms but in the circulation allong this chain: it's a reduction and amplification tradeoff.
This model resonates with the semiology study of comics from (McCloud 1993): comics drawings can be more or less realistic/symbolic.++
  
